During the Cultural Revolution, Ye Wenjie, an astrophysics graduate from Tsinghua University, sees her father get beaten to death during a struggle session by Red Guards from Tsinghua High School. Ye is branded a traitor and is forced to join a labor brigade in Inner Mongolia, and is later sentenced to prison, where she is recruited by Yang Weining and Lei Zhicheng, two military physicists working under Red Coast, a secret Chinese initiative to use high-powered radio waves to damage spy satellites.

After working with them for some time, she learns that the stated purpose is a front for Red Coast's true intention: the search for extraterrestrial life. Ye discovers the possibility of amplifying outgoing radio waves by using microwave cavities within the Sun and sends an interstellar message to test her theory, but tells no one else. Eight years later, now in a loveless marriage with Yang, Ye receives a message from a concerned alien pacifist from the planet Trisolaris in Alpha Centauri,[a] warning her not to respond or else the inhabitants of Trisolaris will be able to deduce the Solar System's location (based on the time it takes them to receive her response to their messages) and invade Earth. Disillusioned by the political chaos and having come to despise humankind, Ye responds anyway, inviting the Trisolarans to come to Earth to settle its problems. She murders Yang and Lei to keep the alien message secret.

Some time later, with the end of the Cultural Revolution and Ye's return to Tsinghua as a professor, Ye encounters Mike Evans, a hermit and the son of the CEO of the world's largest oil company. Evans is a radical environmentalist and anti-speciesist. Seeing that Evans is direly angry at humanity as well, Ye confides in him and tells him about the events at Red Coast. Evans uses his inherited financial power to hire men and purchases the Judgment Day, a giant ship which he converts into a mobile colony and listening post. Upon receiving messages from Trisolaris, validating Ye's story, Evans announces the creation of the militant and semi-secret Earth-Trisolaris Organization (ETO) as a fifth column for Trisolaris and appoints Ye its leader. According to the messages, the Trisolaran invasion fleet has already departed, but will not reach Earth for 450 years.

The society attracts numerous scientists, minor government officials, and other educated people who are disappointed with world affairs. They assemble a private army and build small nuclear weapons. However, Evans retains control of most resources and starts to alter and withhold alien messages from Ye and others. The society splits into factions, with the Adventists, led by Evans, seeking complete destruction of humanity by the Trisolarans, and the Redemptionists, led by Shen Yufei, seeking to help the Trisolarans to find a computational solution to the three-body problem, which plagues their planet. A third, smaller faction, the Survivors, intend to help the Trisolarans in exchange for their own descendants' lives while the rest of humanity dies.

In the present day, Wang Miao, a nanotechnology professor, is asked to work with Shi Qiang, a cunning detective, to investigate the mysterious suicides of several scientists, including Ye's daughter Yang Dong. The two of them notice that the world's governments are communicating closely with each other and have put aside their traditional rivalries to prepare for war. Over the next few days, Wang experiences strange hallucinations and meets with Ye. Wang sees people playing a sophisticated virtual reality video game called Three-Body (which is later revealed to have been created by the ETO as a recruitment tool) and begins to play. The game portrays a planet whose climate randomly flips between Stable and Chaotic Eras. During Chaotic Eras, the weather oscillates unpredictably between extreme cold and extreme heat, sometimes within minutes.

The inhabitants (who are portrayed as having human bodies) seek a way to predict Chaotic Eras so they can better survive. Unlike humans, they have evolved the special ability to "dehydrate", turning themselves into a roll of canvas. They do this in order to lie dormant when the Chaotic Eras occur, saving valuable resources that otherwise would have been wasted. A second individual is required to rehydrate their body, as self-rehydration is not possible. Characters resembling historical figures, including Aristotle, Mozi, and Isaac Newton, fail to produce a model for the planet's climate, as multiple civilizations grow and are wiped out by large-scale disasters. It is Wang who ultimately happens upon the insight that explains the climate of Three-Body, and wins the acclaim of the others. The planet is part of a system with three suns, whose distances from the planet and thus their appearance and disappearance in the sky are stochastic and hard to predict. When two suns are far away and Trisolaris orbits the third, the climate enters a Stable Era. When the planet is too close to two suns, the climate is disrupted, causing a Chaotic Era. If it is close to all three suns, a planet-wide firestorm occurs. If all three suns are distant, the planet enters an ice age. Eventually, at a future time impossible to predict, Trisolaris will collide with one of the suns and be consumed. The game shows the Trisolarans building and launching colony ships to invade Earth, believing that the stable orbit will allow unprecedented prosperity and let them escape the destruction of their planet.

Wang is inducted into the ETO, and informs Shi of one of their meetings. This leads to a battle between the People's Liberation Army (PLA) and the society's soldiers, as well as Ye's arrest. The PLA works with the Americans, led by Colonel Stanton, to ambush Judgment Day as it passes through the Panama Canal. To prevent the crew from destroying records of their communications with the Trisolarans, the team follows Shi's suggestion to use Wang's nano-material filament in a fence, which will quickly cut the ship apart and kill everyone aboard but will not damage the computer systems beyond repair. From the Trisolaran communications, several revelations are discovered. The Trisolarans possess advanced picotechnology that allows them to create 11-dimensional supercomputers called "sophons" which, when viewed in three dimensions, occupy the volume of a proton. Two of these sophons have already been laboriously manufactured and sent to Earth. The Trisolarans do not have faster-than-light travel for spacecraft, but they are able to launch individual sophons at a relativistic speed towards Earth where they have the power to cause hallucinations, spy on any location, transmit the information gathered to Trisolaris using quantum entanglement, and disrupt the operation of particle accelerators. The Trisolarans fear humanity will develop technology advanced enough to fight off the invasion by the time the fleet arrives, and have decided that disrupting the accelerators to give random results will paralyze Earth's technological advancement.

Once several sophons have arrived, they plan to fabricate visual miracles and other hallucinations on a massive scale to make humanity distrust its own scientists. The Trisolarans detect that humanity has made these discoveries via sophons and beam to the eyes of the PLA one final message, "You're bugs!", then cease all communications. Now in custody, Ye is allowed to visit the old Red Coast base, and reflects upon her past choices, noting that humanity from now on will never be the same. Shi finds Wang and his colleagues in a depressed drinking binge, and sobers them up by driving them to his hometown village in Northeastern China. Shi reflects on how despite all the advances humanity has made with pesticides, the simple-minded locust still manages to survive and thrive. With renewed hope, Wang and Shi return to Beijing to help plan the war against the Trisolarans. Now old and weak, Ye Wenjie returns to the top of Radar Peak, once the location of the Red Coast SETI base of operations. As she watches the blood red sun set in the west, she remarks the sight as a "sunset for humanity".

In a flashback, Chinese sociology professor Luo Ji has a chance meeting with Ye Wenjie, the astrophysicist from The Three Body Problem who first contacted the Trisolarans and encouraged their invasion. She suggests he study "cosmic sociology" based on a set of axioms that she shares with him.

In the present day, the UN is trying to find a way to survive the invasion of the Trisolaran fleet, which will arrive in about 421 years. Their prime difficulty is the sophons, super-smart subatomic machines sent from Trisolaris that see everything on Earth and block advances in fundamental physics, and can communicate with Trisolaris in real time through quantum entanglement. The UN must also deal with an organization of Trisolaran loyalists on Earth who support the invasion and carry out acts of sabotage based on instructions from the sophons.

The sophons can overhear any conversation and intercept any written or digital communication but cannot read human thoughts, so the UN devises a countermeasure by initiating the "Wallfacer" Program. Four individuals are granted vast resources and tasked with generating and fulfilling strategies that must never leave their own heads. Three of the Wallfacers are famous for their military, political, psychological and/or scientific expertise; the fourth is the obscure professor Luo Ji, who does not initially understand why he was chosen.

Trisolarans have evolved so that their thoughts transmit openly, and as a result the entire species is unfamiliar with concepts like lies, misdirection and subterfuge. To overcome this weakness, the Trisolarans select three loyalist humans dubbed "Wallbreakers," who are given full access to the information collected by the sophons and tasked with deducing the plans of the Wallfacers. Within a few years, two of the Wallbreakers successfully ruin the strategies of their respective Wallfacers. The third Wallfacer enters hibernation to continue his efforts in a future era, but ultimately his strategy also fails.

Luo doesn't view himself as capable and refuses the position of Wallfacer, but finds himself unable to do so. All his actions, including announcing his resignation, are interpreted as a ruse in service of his ultimate strategy. Selfishly, he takes advantage of his power in order to secure an isolated paradise and an idealised partner. After several years of peace and happiness, his wife reveals her own plan. She wants him to solve the Trisolaran crisis and so puts herself and their daughter into hibernation until the Trisolaran fleet arrives.

Luo learns that he was chosen as a Wallfacer because he is the only human that the Trisolarans have ever directly targeted for assassination (and failed), suggesting that the aliens fear him for some unknown reason. Luo concludes that he must have been targeted because of his conversation with Ye Wenjie, which the sophons presumably overheard. After reflecting on the conversation, he comes to a realization. Luo arranges for the location of a star 49.5 light-years away to be broadcast throughout the galaxy, without explaining his purpose. He then enters hibernation, asking to be woken if an effect on the star is noticed. Soon after the broadcast is sent, the Trisolaran fleet launches a series of probes with faster acceleration that will reach the Solar System much sooner than the rest of the invasion force.

Luo is revived 200 years later in a wealthier, more advanced society and is told that the Wallfacer program has been terminated. Though its technology has been limited by sophon sabotage, Earth has still managed to build a fleet of ships that are larger and faster than the Trisolaran vessels, and world leaders are confident that they can defeat the invasion force. This triumphalism is shattered by the arrival of the Trisolaran's first probe, which proves to be far more technologically sophisticated and annihilates humanity's combined fleet in minutes. Earth collapses into mass hysteria and the few ships that weren't destroyed flee the Solar System to form new civilizations.

The UN discovers that the star whose location Luo had broadcast has been eliminated by an unknown hyper-advanced civilization, and his Wallfacer status is quickly restored. However, Luo says his strategy has already been foiled. After destroying the fleet, the Trisolaran probe stations itself near Earth and begins transmitting a steady jamming signal, preventing any further interstellar communication.

Privately, Luo explains the dark forest hypothesis that underpinned his strategy, which he came to understand after reflecting on his conversation with Ye Wenjie: There is life everywhere in the galaxy, but since growth is constant and resources are finite, each galactic civilization is strongly incentivized to destroy any others upon discovery. The only defense against this is to remain unnoticed, thus explaining the Fermi paradox.

Luo had intended to force the Trisolarans into a truce by threatening to broadcast their home planet's location to the galaxy, creating a mutual assured destruction scenario. With the Trisolaran probe thwarting such communication, a forlorn Luo spends his time on a UN project involving distributing nuclear bombs throughout the outer solar system in order to create cosmic dust that will help detect, but not prevent, the arrival of the main Trisolaran fleet.

However, this is a ruse. His true goal is to circumvent the probe's transmission jamming. Luo reveals to the sophons that the bombs have been programmed and arranged in such a way that the cosmic dust pattern created by their detonation will reveal to all observers Trisolaris' location in the form of Morse code. In exchange for leaving the bombs undetonated, Trisolaris accepts the truce, diverts its fleet, and agrees to aid human scientific progress.

Years later, Luo, reunited with his wife and daughter, converses briefly with the pacifist Trisolaran who had made first contact with Ye Wenjie. They agree that it may be possible for galactic civilizations to brighten the "dark forest" and engage in peaceful relations.

Common Era
During the Fall of Constantinople in AD 1453, a prostitute gains the ability to retrieve small objects in seemingly impossible ways, up to and including the vital organs of heavily guarded human targets. Constantine XI tasks her with killing Mehmed II, but her powers mysteriously vanish, and she is executed. These events are attributed to the passage of a "four-dimensional fragment" through the solar system.

Crisis Era
Prior to her suicide, Yang Dong discovers her mother's conspiracy with Trisolaris and the disruption of all particle accelerators. She meets her scientist fiancé Ding Yi, who insists that life and geography on Earth evolved together, as opposed to the latter merely having enabled the former. Yang Dong, who knows that alien life is extremely common from secret documents of her mother, wonders how it has affected the universe and if its current state is even natural.

An aeronautical engineer named Cheng Xin is recruited by the Planetary Intelligence Agency (PIA) to work on the Staircase Project, an attempt to launch a probe toward the Trisolaran fleet to gather intelligence. The seemingly impossible goal of accelerating the probe to 1% of lightspeed is realized through her idea of lining up ICBMs, Topol and Dongfeng missiles to launch the probe using nuclear pulse propulsion. The Planetary Defence Council (PDC) at first rejects the plan because of the high intercept speed and the unlikelihood of being able to surveil Trisolaran communications. Thomas Wade, the CIA agent leading the project, proposes making the probe desirable to Trisolaris by putting a live human on board, who would then act as a double agent after being integrated into the fleet. However, the mass of the vehicle is limited to only a few kilograms, so Wade decides to find a volunteer to be euthanized and send only their brain, on the assumption that the Trisolarans will be willing and able to reconstruct their body.

One of Cheng Xin's acquaintances, an engineer named Yun Tianming who has always held a secret affection for her, discovers that he is terminally ill. Upon receiving an unexpected sum of money, he buys the title deed to the distant star DX3906 from the United Nations and anonymously gifts it to Cheng. When Cheng learns of Yun's illness, she persuades him to volunteer for the Staircase Project; he is selected as the subject and his brain is extracted and launched. A malfunction causes the spacecraft to go off course into deep space and the project is written off as a failure. After learning that Yun was the source of the star title, Cheng enters hibernation, in order to serve as the Staircase Project's liaison for future generations.

Deterrence Era
The Trisolaran invasion has been forestalled by Luo Ji's creation of Dark Forest Deterrence, which threatens Mutually Assured Destruction (MAD) by broadcasting Trisolaris' location across the universe to bring it to the attention of hostile alien civilizations; doing so would likely allow the hostile civilization to deduce Earth's location as well, due to the proximity of the two systems. The deterrence is enforced by a system of gravitational-wave transmitters distributed across Earth and mounted on some spacecraft. Due to concerns about the system being vulnerable to extremist attacks if control is too widely distributed, the sole responsibility for activating the system in the event of Trisolaran aggression is placed in the hands of one person designated the "Swordholder." Luo Ji is the first holder of the position.

Two groups of human starships fled the solar system in opposite directions after the disastrous battle with the Trisolaran "droplet" probe in the previous book, but each group was quickly reduced to one ship after the crews concluded that they could maximize their chances of survival by killing the other crews and harvesting their ships' resources.

The two surviving ships, Bronze Age and Blue Space, are informed of the truce with Trisolaris and invited to return to Earth. Bronze Age arrives first, but the UN puts its crew on trial for crimes against humanity. Its commander manages to warn Blue Space not to return before his execution; the stellar warship Gravity, which is equipped with a deterrent transmitter, sets off in pursuit, accompanied by two Trisolaran droplet probes, although it will take several decades to catch up.

Fifty years pass. Cheng is woken from hibernation due to her possession of DX3906, which has been discovered to have planets by an astronomer named AA. Cheng keeps the title for the star itself but agrees to sell the rights to the planets, and she and AA start an aerospace company together.

Luo Ji is preparing to retire as Swordholder and the UN is seeking replacements; Cheng becomes the leading candidate. Wade, who has also hibernated, desires the position and attempts to murder her, but fails and is given a long prison sentence. Cheng is selected to succeed Luo, but the moment the handover occurs, Trisolaris begins an attack against Earth using multiple droplets to target the gravitational wave transmitters. They have correctly predicted that Cheng won't be able to bring herself to actually carry out the threat and doom two civilizations.

With the deterrence system neutralized, the Trisolarans immediately break the truce, although their ambassador Sophon announces that the aliens have developed an appreciation for human culture and now intend to let a portion of humanity live on, albeit without any modern technology. The droplets begin directly attacking major cities, and Sophon orders all of humanity to relocate to a reservation in Australia, where they are forced to live under appalling conditions in order to rapidly shrink the population before the Trisolaran fleet arrives to occupy the rest of Earth.

In deep space, Gravity catches up to Blue Space at the same moment that the Swordholder handoff occurs back on Earth. Without warning, the two escort droplets move to destroy both ships in order to take out the last remaining gravitational wave transmitter on Gravity. However, the crew of Blue Space has discovered that the ships have entered another four-dimensional fragment; they learn to navigate the fourth dimension and use that ability to disable the two droplets and capture Gravity at the last moment. They use Gravity's transmitter to send the MAD broadcast, then resolve not to return to the solar system. Upon detecting the broadcast, the Trisolarans abandon their invasion and divert their fleet away from the solar system, concluding that Earth and Trisolaris are now both doomed.

Broadcast Era
One of Trisolaris's three suns is struck by a relativistic "photoid" launched by unspecified aliens, destroying both it and the Trisolaran homeworld. It is understood that sooner or later, the Solar System will suffer a similar attack.

The Trisolarans reveal that they have a fully reconstituted Yun Tianming in their custody, who has been given full access to the Trisolaris' scientific knowledge and databanks, and allow him and Cheng to meet over a sophon-mediated audiovisual link. As the conversation is closely monitored to avoid intelligence disclosures, Yun tells Cheng three elaborate fairy tales, carefully composed to communicate key scientific concepts through metaphor and subtext. Yun invites Cheng to meet him on one of the planets orbiting her star before the link is broken.

The first fairy tale is never decoded even after great effort, and the UN eventually gives up the attempt. The second tale explains that it is possible to reduce the speed of light in a region of space. By lowering the speed of light throughout the solar system to a level below the escape velocity of the sun's gravity, humanity could make the whole system disappear to the galaxy at large, signaling that Earth is harmless and needs not be destroyed, though it would mean trapping human civilization inside the "black domain" forever. The third tale explains that a ship can be accelerated to lightspeed by manipulating the local spacetime behind it, although doing so will permanently alter that section of space.

Bunker Era
Humanity decides to construct space colonies in the shadow of the solar system's gas giants, where they could survive the destruction of the sun by photoid attack. Virtually everyone evacuates from the Earth. Lightspeed travel research is banned after it comes to be seen by the population as an escape hatch for the ultra-wealthy, who could use relativistic time dilation to cheat death; it is also discovered that using it leaves permanent traces on spacetime, which could draw further hostile attention to Earth. Wade, who by now has been released from prison, asks Cheng to transfer her considerable personal wealth to him to finance a secret lightspeed research project; she assents after extracting a promise that he will return the wealth and shut down the program at her request.

Cheng hibernates for sixty years, and is woken when Wade's program is discovered by the government. The technology works and provides very promising research in other fields, but Wade has also created a private army equipped with potentially devastating antimatter weaponry. Horrified by this, Cheng invokes the promise, and Wade surrenders. However, the government shows no mercy to Wade, and executes him, prompting Cheng to return to hibernate with AA until the alien strike comes.

Several decades later, a ship from an unknown hostile alien race detects the signal revealing the location of Trisolaris. An operator on the ship investigates and discovers that Trisolaris has already been eliminated by another ship or hostile race, but the operator then reviews the record of radio broadcasts from Trisolaris and deduces that there must also be intelligent life on Earth. Recognizing that the solar system's gas giant planets create "blind spots" that could allow some life to survive a photoid attack, the operator instead launches a more complex weapon at the solar system.

Humanity detects an alien weapon approaching the solar system and sends a ship to investigate, but the ship is destroyed as the weapon is an expanding spacetime anomaly that collapses the third dimension into the second dimension; humanity has no defense against this and will be rendered extinct within days as the effect spreads across the solar system. The existence of such weapons was the secret of Yun's first fairy tale; using such a weapon was a gesture of respect by the attacker as they considered humanity a dangerous enemy. The only way to survive is either to flee at light speed, or find a way to live in the 2D plane; neither appears a realistic possibility.

One of Wade's former associates awakens Cheng and AA and urges them to fly on one of their corporation's private spacecraft to Pluto, where they meet the now 200-year-old Luo Ji, who gives them a number of artifacts from the Museum of Humanity. They watch from Pluto as the sun and the rest of the planets are pulled into the second dimension and flattened. As the collapse approaches Pluto, Luo Ji then reveals that their ship is equipped with humanity's only lightspeed drive, built in secret by Wade's associates after his death. He instructs them to escape the solar system while he stays behind. They set a course for DX3906 and escape ahead of the collapse wave, which pulls in Pluto and all the remaining human ships that were attempting to flee at sublight speeds, ending human civilization.

Galaxy Era
Cheng Xin and AA arrive at DX3906 286 years later, though the voyage passes quickly for them due to lightspeed time dilation. They discover that the system has two planets, which they name Planet Blue and Planet Gray. There, they encounter Guan Yifan, a civilian cosmologist of Gravity, who explains that the crew of his ship and Blue Space went on to develop curvature propulsion and founded an interstellar society.

Cheng Xin and Guan Yifan fly to the nearby Planet Gray to investigate signs of alien activity. They discover a series of Death Lines, the seed elements of a black domain, laid down by the aliens in order to hasten the end of the universe. Guan Yifan explains that endless interstellar warfare using curvature- and dimension-based weaponry is degrading the entire universe. In its youth, the universe possessed ten dimensions, and the speed of light was near infinity, but as time passed, warring galactic civilizations collapsed regions of space into lower dimensions, forcing each other to permanently migrate there while the higher dimensions ceased to exist entirely. Simultaneously, the civilizations' widespread use of black domains permanently lowered the speed of light throughout the universe to the current value of c.

As Cheng Xin and Guan Yifan fly back to Planet Blue, they are notified by AA that Yun Tianming has arrived there. Cheng is overjoyed that they will finally reunite. However, the death lines are triggered, possibly by the activity of Yun's curvature drive, converting the system into a black domain with a lightspeed only marginally above their current orbital velocity, meaning they are now orbiting Planet Blue at relativistic speed. Guan's spacecraft has backup systems that can function in a black domain, but it will take many hours for them to boot up, forcing Cheng and Guan to hibernate to conserve oxygen. Once the process completes, they realize that 18 million years have passed in Planet Blue's frame of reference. Upon descending to Blue, they find a message carved in rock, revealing that AA and Yun lived a happy life together, and have left Cheng and Guan a gift: a portal to a pocket universe, made with Trisolaran technology, containing one cubic kilometer of idyllic farmstead. They enter the universe, meet with Sophon, who was already living there, and wait outside of time for the main universe to die and be reborn in a Big Bounce.

After living there for some time, the three receive an alien message aimed at all denizens of the micro-universes in over 1.5 million languages (including Trisolaran and those of Earth), stating that the presence of micro-universes deprives the main universe of mass, disrupting its cycle of expansion, collapse and rebirth. Cheng Xin, accompanied by Yifan and Sophon, wearily reflects on her lifetime of moral duty. They decide to disassemble the contents of the micro-universe and return the mass to the main universe, then join it in death and rebirth. They leave behind a message in a bottle and a self-sustaining terrarium for the denizens of the reborn universe to uncover.